# Last week, I had the pleasure of attending Prime Minister Narendra Modi's address to the joint meeting of U.S. Congress.  The leader of the world's largest democracy spoke to the leaders of the world's oldest democracy. Despite the significant differences that exist between our two countries, Prime Minister Modi's inspiring address focused on our similarities—from sacrifices of war to the practice of Yoga. One of these similarities and an underlying theme of the speech was the struggles each country faces with terrorism and geopolitical challenges, and the need to strengthen security and defense cooperation.  

# "Threats of terror are expanding, and new challenges are emerging  . . . . We have both lost soldiers and civilians combating it," Modi stated to Congress. Terrorism poses a major threat to India, which has over 800 terrorist cells incubated in India’s neighborhoods and operating throughout the country. Moreover, the scars have not healed from the 2008 Mumbi Islamic-militant terrorist attacks that caused nearly 800 casualties and left about 166 dead.  America has similar challenges.  Just today, in an apparent act of terrorism the U.S. experienced the worst mass shooting in its history, with over 100 casualties at a Florida nightclub. Whether called Taliban, ISIS, or Lashkar -e-Tabia, we share a common enemy: one that embraces hate, murder, and violence.    


# "For us to succeed, those who believe in humanity must come together and fight for it as one..." —Narendra Modi
# Aside from terrorism, geopolitical tensions are increasing.  India believes that with a strong military, robust 21st century institutions, and a broad partnership with the U.S., it will improve the safety and security of both countries and contribute to a stable world order.  Modi stated, “A stronger and prosperous India is in America's strategic interest.” To date, the U.S. is already India’s principal military training partner.  Additionally, India is also one of the largest contributors of troops to United Nations peacekeeping operations, and they are actively seeking a permanent membership on the UN Security Council—a move that will accelerate current numbers by a factor of 9.  Likewise, India has stepped up and assumed its responsibility for securing the India Ocean.   

# In an effort to meet Modi's ambitious defense goals, which include becoming less reliant on foreign military support and reviving India's moribund defense industry, defense purchases in India have gone from almost nothing to $10 billion is less than a decade. Today, India is the world’s largest importer of weapons and military equipment.  Over the next decade, India will spend over $100 billion on defense and is expected to be the fourth largest military spender in the world, behind the U.S., Russia, and China. However, India cannot get there alone and partnership with the U.S. is essential.

# U.S. defense and security firms can leverage their technology and expertise and enter or expand into the Indian defense market at a time when aggregate U.S. defense spending is declining. India already welcomes this support.  In  2014, India increased the stakes that foreign defense contractors were allowed to hold in joint defense ventures from 26 percent to 49 percent. However, India’s foreign direct investment in defense is still only half of that of other major industries.The U.S. embraces cooperation as well; the U.S. entered into the Defense Trade and Technology Initiative (DTTI) with India—a 10-year agreement that strengthens military cooperation, including the co-development and co-production of specific advanced defense projects.

# India is an emerging world power with tremendous potential for U.S.-India defense and security cooperation and greenfield opportunity for U.S. defense and security firms.  In the words of Prime Minister Modi to U.S. Congress, "There can be no doubt that advancing this relationship, both nations stand to gain in great measure."    
